                                          This article has been published in the Physiological Measurement journal




                                            Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals: Recent
                                            Development, Challenges, and Future Directions




arXiv:2111.08446v3 [eess.SP] 9 May 2022
                                                          Huy Phan1,2 , Kaare Mikkelsen3
                                                          1
                                                            School of Electronic Engineering & Computer Science, Queen Mary University of
                                                          London, UK
                                                          2
                                                            The Alan Turing Institute, UK
                                                          3
                                                            Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Aarhus University, Denmark
                                                          E-mail: h.phan@qmul.ac.uk, mikkelsen.kaare@ece.au.dk


                                                          Abstract.
                                                              Modern deep learning holds a great potential to transform clinical practice on
                                                          human sleep. Teaching a machine to carry out routine tasks would be a tremendous
                                                          reduction in workload for clinicians. Sleep staging, a fundamental step in sleep practice,
                                                          is a suitable task for this and will be the focus in this article. Recently, automatic
                                                          sleep staging systems have been trained to mimic manual scoring, leading to similar
                                                          performance to human sleep experts, at least on scoring of healthy subjects. Despite
                                                          tremendous progress, we have not seen automatic sleep scoring adopted widely in
                                                          clinical environments. This review aims to give a shared view of the authors on the
                                                          most recent state-of-the-art development in automatic sleep staging, the challenges
                                                          that still need to be addressed, and the future directions for automatic sleep scoring
                                                          to achieve clinical value.




                                            1. Introduction

                                            Sleep makes up almost one third of our lives. Good sleep is crucial in maintaining one’s
                                            mental and physical health [1, 2] while sleep disorders are linked with a host of different
                                            ailments [3]. Screening, assessment, and diagnosis for sleep disorders require each 30-
                                            second epoch of an overnight polysomnogram (PSG) to be assigned a sleep stage. This
                                            procedure is known as sleep staging or scoring. The sequence of sleep stages is critical
                                            for measuring parameters of the sleep macrostructure, such as the sleep cycles, the time
                                            spend in each stage, sleep latency, wake after sleep onset (WASO), etc. Sleep stages
                                            and cycles, which manifest the underlying neuro-physiological processes, are also a rich
                                            source for mining diagnostic markers for a wide range of sleep disorders [4–7], from a
                                            common one like obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) [8,9] to a rare one like narcolepsy [6,7].
                                                 Sleep staging is still largely carried out by clinicians in sleep clinics guided by a
                                            well established manual, published by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine [10].
                                            This labor-intensive and time-consuming manual scoring is unsuited for handling large-
                                            scale data and cannot be scaled to serve the needs of millions suffering from sleep
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                      2

disorders [11–13]. At the same time, there is an increasing need for longitudinal
monitoring in home environments. Accurate and cost effective monitoring of sleep not
only has great medical value but also allows individuals to self-assess and self-manage
their sleep. Thus, it is imperative for sleep staging to be automated. The fact that it
follows a predefined set of rules makes sleep staging a perfect task for automation with
machine learning. Furthermore, a machine can perform the task thousands of times
faster than a human expert, while saving a clinician thousands of hours a year and
making sleep assessment and diagnosis more widely available.
     Indeed, given the standardization of data through the use of PSG for recordings,
a very large volume of methods development has already taken place. Particularly, the
existence of increasingly large public data sets online (for example, PhysioNet [14] and
the National Sleep Research Resource (NSRR) [15]) has enabled exploitation of deep
learning [16, 17] to teach a machine to perform sleep staging using a large amount of
training data in the last couple of years. These efforts have led to more advanced
and sensible methods [18–24] which have surpassed the agreement level of experts’
scoring and achieved a performance acceptable for clinical use. Notwithstanding this
tremendous progress, machine sleep scoring still needs to overcome several technical
and clinical barriers to be widely adopted and deliver full clinical value. We see great
potential for further development. First, from algorithmic perspectives, we consider
sleep staging to be an interesting modelling problem where novel methods can be
developed to tackle the foreseeable obstacles and pave the way for clinical usage. Second,
this is related to the emergence of new recording platforms [25–28] to simplify the sleep
setup for home-based monitoring purposes.
     In this review article, we begin by discussing the clinical context of automatic sleep
scoring, after which we give an overview as well as technical insights of the state-of-
the-art methods for automatic scoring of EEG data. Readers should note that a few
existing reviews, such as Fiorilli et al. [29] and Faust et al. 2019 [30], have summed
up the topic prior to 2019. A review on broader applications of deep learning on EEG
analysis also exists [31]. To avoid re-inventing the wheel, this article focuses on the latest
method development in automatic sleep staging. In addition, we limit the scope of this
article to fine-grained (i.e., five stages) sleep staging using PSG and modalities directly
reading brain activities, such as mobile EEGs, and will not cover research work using
other modalities, such as electrocardiogram (ECG)/photoplethysmography (PPG) [32],
actigraphy [33], audio [34], video [35], and radar [36, 37]. We then discuss the current
challenges, and suggest directions to move forwards. As we shall discuss in the next
section, much good work has already been done on this problem. However, as it will
become clear in the rest of this review, we believe the field has only solved the first,
“entry”, problem, and a plethora of new and exciting tasks lie ahead of us.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                   3

2. Clinical context

Manual sleep scoring is a somewhat reliable, highly versatile method, which readily
yields interpretations and which is standardized across the world. This has made it a
good solution, but also a local optimum which is hard to escape. By this we mean that
it is not the best possible solution, due to a number of drawbacks:

 (i) It is very time consuming (and therefore expensive) to manually score an entire
     night’s recording. Even more so if sleep events are also to be annotated.
(ii) Despite the existence of a sleep scoring standard, there is still variation between
     individual scorers.
(iii) The sleep scoring manual is based on the polysomnography (PSG) recording setup,
      which is generally considered to be unwieldy and invasive on sleep. This, combined
      with the cost of each recording, means that clinicians will usually have to ‘make
      do’ with a single (at most two) nights of data, which may not be as representative
      of the patient’s usual nights as one would hope.

     It should come as no surprise that the properties of manual sleep scoring have
shaped the way sleep monitoring is used - few recordings per subject, qualitative (non-
data driven) analysis. This can make it hard, within the clinical reality, to immediately
see the benefits of a new method (automatic sleep scoring with other sensor setups).
Figuratively speaking, if you have learned to solve all problems using nails, it is hard to
see how a screwdriver can compete with your hammer.
     Automatic sleep scoring can reduce the costs of existing procedures (PSG recordings
either in lab or at home), but also open the door to new ways of using sleep clinically,
which today would be infeasible. We can imagine population wide screening for early
stages of debilitating diseases (e.g., the REM Sleep Behavior Disorder (RBD) is known
to be tightly associated with Parkinson’s disease [38]), or routine follow-up procedures
quantifying patient sleep after they leave the hospital. These procedures could have
very real clinical benefits, but they all require changes to how sleep recordings are used
and managed, not to abolish existing procedures, but to supplement them.
     An algorithm-first approach to clinical sleep can also solve other problems. First,
given the costs of a PSG recording, clinicians may often have to ‘make do’ with
whatever recordings they get, even if the quality is questionable. However, if the
standard quantum becomes a week’s worth of data, automatic discarding of low quality
nights would be trivial. Second, definitions surrounding sleep have been developed and
evaluated based on how well they can be used in manual sleep scoring. Computers have
far fewer restrictions in this manner, and we can imagine more flexible taxonomies, such
as hypnodensity plots [6] or even disease-specific sleep states.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                  4

3. The state-of-the-art sleep scoring

Modern deep learning [16, 17] crept into sleep research much slower than other fields
such as computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition. The use
of deep neural networks for automatic sleep staging only started around 5 years ago even
though their resurgence has been almost a decade. Nevertheless, in this short period of
time, deep neural networks have produced impactful and meaningful results that were
never seen with more conventional machine learning methods for a long time.
      Transitioning from conventional machine learning, the first attempts to use deep
learning for automatic sleep staging mainly employed simple networks in traditional
fashion where a short input contexts of one to a few sleep epochs around a target
epoch is used to predict the sleep stage of the target epoch. Expectedly, an influx
of different variants of typical standalone network architectures, such as DNN [39, 40],
CNN [18, 41–51], and RNN [44, 52] (e.g., long short-term memory (LSTM) [53] or gated
recurrent unit (GRU) [54]), was seen with limited success. Although these networks
are able to learn useful features to represent an input, they are unable to capture long-
range dependencies between sleep epochs due to the short input context. The ability
of modelling long-range dependency plays an important role in improving sleep staging
performance, due to the inherently slow-transition nature of the physiological processes
behind sleep stages [55, 56]. In order to compensate for the lack of long-term modelling
ability, once such a network has been trained and each epoch is encoded into an epoch-
wise feature vector, an additional RNN (e.g. LSTM) [6,18,39,57] was separately trained
in a second stage to take into account a long sequence of epoch-wise feature vectors prior
to a target epoch to classify it. These hybrid networks with two-stage training initiated
by Supratak et al. [18] boosted the performance significantly and stood out from the
other exiting models at the time.
      In fact, the positive effect introduced by long-term modelling in the above-
mentioned two-stage training scheme is not a surprise. It resembles how manual
scoring is done by sleep experts who normally need to attend to a much larger
context around a target epoch in order to determine its label [10]. From modelling
perspective, this has commonly been accomplished by Hidden Markov Models (HMM)
(see [58] for example) before the evolution of deep learning. However, the early works
[6, 18, 39, 57] came with some limitations. First, the independent two-stage training of
two subnetworks is sub-optimal since it does not account for the interaction between the
epoch-wise feature-learning network and the sequential-modelling counterpart, let alone
its inconvenience. Second, even the sequential-modelling network (i.e., the bidirectional
RNN) is structured to receive a sequence of epochs as input, it classifies only one target
epoch at a time which is usually the last epoch in the input sequence. That is, it is
tasked to encode the left-side context of the target epoch in order to make a prediction.
Olesen et al. in [21] showed that this left-side context often results in lower accuracy
than when more balanced one is used.
      Nevertheless, these initial results underscore the essence of long-term modelling in
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                             5
                      Label 1           Label 2                         Label L


                                                    Sequence Encoder




                      Epoch
                     Encoder
                                         Epoch
                                        Encoder          ...            Epoch
                                                                       Encoder



                     Epoch 1           Epoch 2                         Epoch L

Figure 1: A schematic diagram of sequence-to-sequence sleep staging. Effectively,
different epochs in the input sequence is influenced by different contexts, illustrated by
the shaded regions in the sequence encoder block, depending on their absolute position
in the sequence. The epoch encoder plays the role of the epoch-wise feature extractor
that transforms an epoch into a feature vector representation, illustrated by a green
circle. The sequence encoder enriches the presentation, illustrated by a red circle, by
incorporating interaction of each epoch with other epochs in its context.


automatic sleep staging. Inspired by these results, since late 2018, the community has
been witnessing an influx of advanced network architectures with built-in long-term
modelling capacity. These networks can be generalized neatly in a common framework,
namely sequence-to-sequence sleep staging framework [59]. Formally, let us denote an
input sequence of L epochs as (S1 , . . . , SL ) where Sℓ is the ℓ-th epoch, 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L. In
general, the epochs can be in any form, such as raw signals or time-frequency images and
they can be single- or multi-channel. A network adhering to the framework typically
consists of two main components: the epoch encoder FE and the sequence encoder
FS as illustrated in Figure 1. The epoch encoder FE : S 7→ x acts as an epoch-
wise feature extractor which transforms an input epoch S in the input sequence into a
feature vector x for representation. As a result, the input sequence is transformed into a
sequence of feature vectors (x1 , . . . , xL ) (represented by the green circles in the figure).
Of note, FS can be a hard-coded hand-crafted feature extractor, however, in the deep
learning context, it is oftentimes a neural network (e.g., a CNN or an RNN) that learns
the feature presentation x automatically from low-level input signals. In turn, at the
sequence level, the sequence encoder FS : (x1 , . . . , xL ) 7→ (z1 , . . . , zL ) transforms the
sequence (x1 , . . . , xL ) into another sequence (z1 , . . . , zL ) (represented by the red circles
in the figure). In intuition, zℓ is a richer representation for the ℓ-th epoch than xℓ as it not
only encompasses information of the epoch but also encodes its interaction with other
epochs in the sequence. More specifically, zℓ is derived from xℓ , taking into account the
left context (x1 , . . . , xℓ−1 ) and the right context (xℓ+1 , . . . , xL ). Eventually, the vectors
z1 , . . . , zL are used for classification purpose to obtain the sequence of predicted sleep
stages, one for each epoch in the input sequence.
        The framework features two advantages, making them overcome the limitations of
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                   6

the earlier proposals in [6, 18, 39, 57]. First, both FE and FS are optimized jointly in an
end-to-end training fashion, allowing the interaction of the two network components.
Second, they are tasked to solve a sequence-to-sequence classification problem, i.e.,
sequence-to-sequence sleep staging. In other words, a network classifies all the epochs
in an input sequence at once rather than only targeting the last epoch. Due to this
sequence-to-sequence scheme, different epochs in the input sequence is, in essence,
influenced by different contexts depending on their absolute position in the sequence.
This is illustrated by the shaded regions in Figure 1. Leveraging this property, sampling
and advancing the sequence by one epoch at a time will result in L decisions for a
particular epoch. These decisions are associated with diverging contexts; thus, forming
an ensemble from them has been shown to lead to performance improvement [19, 23].
     In Table 1, we give an overview of automatic sleep staging systems that possess
capacity of long-term context modelling. The systems are presented in chronological
order. On the one hand, most of the systems expectedly exploited CNN, the cornerstone
of deep learning algorithms, for the epoch encoder. The spectrum of the CNN
architectures varies from a very basic one [18, 60] to specialized ones, such as ResNet
[21], U-Net [61, 62], and U2 -Net [63]. Epoch-wise features can also be learned by
capturing sequential information within 30-second signals using RNNs solely (e.g.,
LSTM [53] and GRU [54]) [19,22,64] or hybrid networks (e.g., CRNN [60,65]). Emerging
network architectures like graph convolutional network (GCN) [66] and Transformer [24]
have also been shown to be useful for epoch encoding. On the other hand, RNNs
have primarily been employed for the sequence encoder due to its well-established
capability in sequential modelling. However, inter-epoch sequence modelling can also
be accomplished by non-recursive architectures, such as dilated CNN [63], self-attention
[67], and Transformer [24]. It should be noted that not all of the networks in the table
are strictly sequence-to-sequence (e.g., DeepSleepNet [18], Stephansen et al. [6], and
GraphSleepNet [66]) or end-to-end (e.g., DeepSleepNet [18], Stephansen et al. [6] and
Sun et al. [57]). However, in principle, they can be framed into the sequence-to-sequence
framework and trained end-to-end as what was done with the end-to-end sequence-to-
sequence variant of DeepSleepNet in [19].
     We also collate the performance of the systems on common public sleep databases
in Table 1. These results are obtained either from the original works or in other
works where the systems are evaluated. We can see a Cohen’s kappa of ≥ 0.81, i.e.,
“almost perfect” agreement level according to the interpretation of Cohen’s kappa [68],
achieved on databases with a majority of healthy subjects, for example, EDF-20, MASS,
SHHS, DOD-H, DOD-O, and CHAT. However, the performance is still substandard
on databases associated with sleep pathologies, such as ISRUC and CAP. It is worth
stressing that the performance presented in the table should not be used out-of-context
to justify a network’s efficacy or compare one to another. The rational is that the
potential discrepancies in evaluation setup (e.g., data subsets, the number of channels,
etc.) and modelling (e.g., scratch training vs. domain adaptation, supervised vs.
unsupervised learning, etc.), renders such a comparison meaningless.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals
Table 1: Automatic sleep staging systems that has capacity of long-term context modelling published since late 2018 and sorted
in chronological order. The reported performance are also presented in term of Cohen’s kappa [68]. Alternatively, macro F1-score
(indicated with the subscript f ) and overall accuracy (indicated with the subscript a ) are presented where Cohen’s kappa is not
available. Note that not all of networks here are strictly sequence-to-sequence and/or end-to-end.

                                                                                                                     Physio-                                                SVUH-
                                                           Epoch         Sequence        EDF-     EDF-      MASS               SHHS     DOD-     DOD-     ISRUC CAP               MESA MrOS CHAT
  Network                   Year         Input                                                                        2018                                                   UCD
                                                          Encoder        Encoder        20 [69]   78 [69]    [70]               [72]    H [64]   O [64]     [73] [74]              [75] [76, 77] [78, 79] Other
                                                                                                                      [71]                                                   [14]
  DeepSleepNet [18, 19]     2017∗         Raw              CNN             RNN          0.760     0.702     0.800      −         −      0.843    0.804      −        −        −     −      −      0.848    −
  SeqSleepNet [19]          2018       Time-freq.          RNN             RNN          0.809     0.776     0.815     0.733    0.838    0.804    0.772      −        −        −     −      −      0.854    −
  Stephansen et al. [6]     2018     Corr. encoding        CNN             RNN            −         −         −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −     0.868a
  Biswal et al. [20]        2018       Time-freq.          CNN             RNN            −         −         −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −     0.805
  SleepEEGNet [80]          2019          Raw              CNN             RNN          0.790     0.730       −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  SimpleSleepNet [64]       2019       Time-freq.          RNN             RNN            −         −         −        −         −      84.6     82.3       −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  Chen et al. [81]†         2019          Raw              CNN          RNN, CRF        0.820       −         −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −     0.670
  IITNet [60]               2019          Raw             CRNN             RNN          0.780     0.790       −        −       0.810      −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  U-Time [61]/U-Sleep [62] 2019           Raw              U-Net           CNN          0.790f    0.760f    0.800f   0.770f    0.800f   0.820f   0.790f   0.770f   0.680f   0.730f   0.790f   0.770f   0.850f 0.850f
  TinySleepNet [82]         2020          Raw              CNN             RNN          0.800     0.770     0.782      −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −      −
  GraphSleepNet [66]        2020          Raw              GCN           Attention        −         −       0.834      −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  Olesen et al. [21]        2020          Raw             ResNet           RNN            −         −         −        −       0.871a     −        −      0.740a     −        −        −      0.864a     −     0.864a
  Jaoude et al. [83]        2020          Raw              CNN             RNN            −         −         −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −     0.740
  Sun et al. [57]           2020    Raw, hand-crafted      CNN             RNN            −         −       0.795      −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  Korkalainen et al. [84]   2020          Raw              CNN             RNN            −       0.780       −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −     0.790
  Qu et al. [85]            2020          Raw           CNN, ResNet    Self-attention   0.780       −       0.800      −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  HNSleepNet [86]           2020          Raw              CNN        RNN, Attention    0.780       −       0.810      −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  Li et al. [87]            2020          Raw              CNN        RNN, Attention    0.790       −         −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  FCNN+RNN [23]             2020          Raw            Fully CNN         RNN          0.775     0.759     0.806     0.738     80.9      −        −        −        −        −        −        −      0.847     −
  XSleepNet [23]            2020     Raw, time-freq.    CNN, RNN           RNN          0.813     0.778     0.823     0.746    0.847      −        −        −        −        −        −        −      0.857     −
  RobustSleepNet [22]       2021       Time-freq.          RNN             RNN          0.817f    0.779f    0.825f     −       0.800f   0.851f   0.827f     −      0.738f     −      0.795f   0.756f     −       −
  CCRRSleepNet [65]         2021          Raw             CRNN             RNN          0.780       −         −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  Eldele et al. [67]        2021          Raw              CNN         Self-attention   0.790     0.740       −        −       0.780      −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  RecSleepNet [88]          2021          Raw              CNN             RNN          0.813f    0.779f      −        −         −        −        −      0.779f     −      0.743f     −        −        −       −
  Coon et al. [89]          2021          Raw              CNN             RNN            −         −         −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −     0.769a
  SalientSleepNet [63]      2021          Raw             U2 -Net      Dilated CNN      0.830f    0.795f      −        −         −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −        −       −
  SleepTransformer [24]     2021       Time-freq.       Transformer    Transformer        −       0.789       −        −       0.828      −        −        −        −        −        −        −      0.842     −




 ∗ DeepSleepNet was introduced by Supratak et al. [18] in 2017 and the end-to-end version was presented as a baseline in the SeqSleepNet work [19] by Phan et al. in 2018.
 † Chen et al. [81] conducted 4-stage classification rather 5-stage classification in other works in the table.                                                                                                         7
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                     8

4. Challenges and future directions

In our view, automatic sleep staging with PSG on healthy people has basically been
solved, not only for adults [20, 23] but also for children [90]. The comparative study by
Phan et al. [90] showed that different network architectures under the same sequence-to-
sequence framework result in a similar “almost perfect” consensus level (according to the
interpretation of Cohen’s kappa [68]) and little discrepancy was seen among their staging
outcomes. This suggests that there is probably little room for accuracy improvement
within the same sequence-to-sequence framework. Furthermore, the improvement, if
any, is not necessarily meaningful.
     While automatic sleep scoring of PSG recordings has come a very long way as
described above, there are still challenges to be overcome. These, of course, should
be viewed as opportunities for innovation. In Figure 2, we give an overview of the
challenges around two critical applications, sleep scoring with PSG in clinical spaces
and sleep monitoring with wearable EEG in daily living environments, and directions
for future works to address the challenges. Before discussing the individual challenges,
we feel it is valuable to highlight the overarching contexts of the two applications:
     Clinical PSG scoring: It is not sufficient to have high quality PSG scoring of healthy
people. In a clinical setting, the tools applied should be equally capable when confronted
with non-textbook sleep phenotypes, where the sleep EEG may either be masked by
disease-related artifacts, or where the sleep EEG itself may be drastically changed by
the patient’s condition that a correct sleep scoring either requires specialized routines or
may even be impossible. An automatic sleep scoring algorithm must be able to handle
this situation transparently and reliably. Thus, to obtain more widespread adoption
clinically, automatic sleep scoring should be as robust as manual scoring, and deliver
outputs which are easy to fit into clinical workflows. In Figure 2, this relates particularly
to ‘data heterogeneity’, ‘model interpretability’, ‘learning with noisy labels’ and ‘tailored
algorithms’.
     Wearable EEG scoring: Medical grade mobile sleep monitoring has great potentials
for revolutionizing healthcare both in screening, diagnosing and follow-up. A high
quality monitoring platform would allow easy recording of weeks of sleep from each
individual, without incurring higher healthcare costs or discomfort the patient. Such
data would be much more representative of the patient’s actual sleeping patterns, and
alleviate the present issues with phenomena which are only periodic, or which may be
impacted by patients sleeping in unfamiliar environments. To reap the full benefits from
such a monitoring device, we need analysis tools which can be tailored to the individual,
which can detect subtle changes in sleep patterns, and which can describe a patient’s
sleep in different, quantitative terms than the present single-night hypnograms.
     The discussion below is structured following the overview outlined in Figure 2.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                          9

                                          Longitudinal       Individual modelling
                                           monitoring       Change detection
                                                            Subject classification
                                              Low
                                          signal quality
                                                            Individualization

                                           Small data
         Sleep monitoring                                   Transfer learning
       (with wearable EEG)
                                            Privacy
                                                            Decentralized learning
                                          preservation

                                                            Tailored algorithms
                                         Sleep disorders

                                                           Model’s interpretability
                                           Black-box
                                            criticism
                                                           Domain adaptation

                                         Data mismatch     Domain-invariant features
         Sleep scoring                                     Data mapping
          (with PSG)
                                             Data
                                         heterogeneity     Holistic modelling

                                                           Learning with multiple annotations
                                            Model’s
                                           subjectivity    Learning with noisy labels

                                             Scorer        Uncertainty quantification
                                         personalization   Continual learning

        APPLICATIONS                     CHALLENGES        FUTURE DIRECTIONS


     Figure 2: Applications, challenges, and directions in automatic sleep staging.


4.1. Longitudinal monitoring
A particularly interesting development in sleep monitoring, closely related to automatic
scoring, is the feasibility of long term monitoring. With conventional PSG setups,
scored by hand, it is generally too expensive, not to say inconvenient for the wearer,
to perform nightly recordings for weeks on end. However, when scoring is free, and
when the hardware can be self-applied [25–27] and is relatively unobtrusive, longitudinal
monitoring becomes much more feasible. Interested readers are recommended to refer
to [91] for a complete review on devices for wearable sleep staging. These types of
devices, and the data sets recorded with them, open new, very interesting avenues of
research:

4.1.1. Individual modelling Given a large number of nights from an individual, it
seems both possible and advantageous to create personal models using this data.
Indeed, we may be inspired by more general approaches for semi-supervised machine
learning [92–94]. We could imagine that a successful approach would not only lead
to an individual model, but a model which could keep up with the possible “concept
drift” that is caused by the long-term changes in a person’s sleep patterns. At the same
time, such an adaptive approach should be resistant to “catastrophic forgetting” [95], in
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                       10

which the sequential learning of a neural network causes it to forget how to solve previous
problems, in this case how to deal with types of sleep or events which only happen very
infrequently for the given subject. We suspect that simply requiring a long “memory”
is sufficient to solve this problem. Given the performance of models trained as leave-
one-subject-out, the size of standard data sets, the fact that inter-subject variation is
estimated to be a significant driver of sleep data variation [96–99] and studies evaluating
the performance of individualized models [27, 100], we expect that on the order of a 100
nights would be sufficiently long.

4.1.2. Change detection A natural extension to this discussion is detection of sudden
(between nights), serious changes to an individual’s sleep. Given the large variation
in sleep in a given subject, this is not readily feasible based on a few nights. However,
based on perhaps weeks of data before and after a significant event (e.g., surgery, change
in medication, disease onset, etc.), it seems possible that we could reliably detect that
a patient had started to sleep differently. Conceivably, such change detection will be
aided by the development of a continuously updating model (since this should entail
detecting the need for significant updates).

4.1.3. Subject classification It has been shown that despite the significant night-to-
night variation in an individual’s sleep, it is possible to define “trait-like characteristics”,
special to the individual [97–99, 101]. Ideally, this could mean that given a sufficient
amount of sleep recordings from an individual, those could be transformed into a reliable
biomarker, which could be used to determine not only changes in sleep patterns, but
also whether a given patient’s sleep was indicative of certain specific diseases, such as
RBD.

4.2. Low signal quality - device limitations for mobile sleep monitoring
Mobile sleep monitoring devices have great potential for helping both healthy and sick
users get increased knowledge about their own sleep. However, as has been shown in
multiple studies [26, 27], even the best studies do not achieve the same inter-scorer
reliability measures as PSG-based approaches (state-of-the-art values for Cohen’s kappa
seem to be about 0.75 for mobile devices [26,102], while PSG data leads to values above
0.8). A lower signal-to-noise ratio for these types of data (relative to PSG recordings)
is likely the main cause for the degraded performance in mobile solutions. Multiple
studies [28, 102] have achieved much better performance from the same number of PSG
nights as mobile EEG nights (using concurrent recordings). This means that while
small data sets can definitely be an issue as discussed in Section 4.3, it seems that
making many recordings is likely not sufficient. We can model this phenomenon by
imagining the mobile data set as a projection of the high-dimensional PSG data into
a lower-dimensional space, with resulting information loss. Given the differences in
neuroanatomy, it is reasonable to consider this projection to be subject dependent, and
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                 11

depending on the device design, we could also expect there to be a variation between
recording days (because the device may be mounted differently each time).
     Several studies have shown that including subject specific information increases
sleep scoring performance [27, 100, 103], which is also in line with general EEG studies
showing significant differences between individuals [104,105]. Mikkelsen et al. [27] found
that the differences between algorithms trained on data just from the same subject, and
data from both the same subject and many other subjects were minimal. This indicates
that the benefit from personalizing sleep scoring algorithms is not that irrelevant data
is excluded, but rather that maximally relevant data is included. If this trend were to
scale to much larger cohorts, one could imagine that for sufficiently large cohorts, the
personalized and general algorithms would perform similarly. However, achieving such
a broad training set may be unrealistic in practice.
     Individualization of algorithms have been done in multiple ways. Some studies have
used random forest ensemble models [27,103,106], which can be trained using very little
data. This makes it possible to create full sleep scoring models using only a single or
few nights of data from an individual. Other studies, using deep neural networks, have
instead resorted to variations of fine tuning population models to individuals. Phan et
al. [100] explored a technique where the model, during fine tuning, was penalized for
making large changes to the output in the source domain, effectively limiting the risk
of overfitting to the fine tuning data set.
     Note that while some groups focus on developing the entire device, others have
strictly worked on developing sleep scoring algorithms for generic “single channel EEG”
data sets, without relating it to a specific device [107, 108]. In this discussion we have
lumped the two approaches together. We note also that similar observations, regarding
mobile device monitoring, are made in the review by Chriskos et al. [109].

4.3. Modelling with a small amount of data
Training a deep neural network generally requires a large amount of data. In fact,
deep-learning based sleep staging models only reach expert-level performance when the
training cohort is large, i.e., hundreds or thousands of subjects [19, 20, 23, 62]. The
networks trained with a small cohort continue exhibiting substandard performance.
Unfortunately, in practice, many sleep studies only have access to a small cohort, in
the order of a few dozens of subjects, for example when studying a particular sleep
disorder [5, 48].
     This scenario is particularly common in studies exploring the feasibility of a new
monitoring device, for example mobile EEG devices [27,28,110]. While the PSG benefits
from being an established standard with an enormous user base, new alternatives, by
definition, do not. Add to this that many such devices will undergo multiple generations
which may not be compatible. Finally and crucially, new training sets will usually
require special recordings of both a device and PSG signals, to obtain the necessary
ground truth manual PSG scoring which constitutes the training labels. All together,
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                 12

this means that algorithms for new sleep monitoring devices usually have to be trained
with quite small data sets.
     The most popular solution to this problem is to use transfer learning, usually in the
sense that a neural network is trained on a large sleep data set, often consisting of PSG
recordings. This model is then fine-tuned using the new data set [22, 59, 108, 110, 111].
Although model fine tuning often results in better performance than scratch model
training, the gains are modest in some cases. The problem is that by fine tuning, we
essentially further train a pretrained model with a small amount of data that easily
causes overfitting without a proper regularization, especially when the source domain
and the target domain are significantly different. This can be remedied by fine tuning
just a part of the pretrained model, however, identifying the most relevant layers for
fine tuning still remains an unsolved question. EEG data augmentation [112] is another
direction to explore.

4.4. Privacy preservation: a note for sleep monitoring
Brain waves are a rich source of information from which deciphering numerous sensitive
piece of information has been shown possible, such as identity [104], age [113], gender
[114], emotion [115], preference [116], personality [117], etc. This poses a challenge to
protect this information from user perspective and to comply with legal restrictions,
such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [118] in European Union and
Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights (CPBR) [119] in the US.
      Traditionally, when sleep staging models are trained, adapted, and deployed
centrally, EEG signals are expected to be sent via some communication means. Data
privacy and security concerns should be paid heed in this case, however, it is beyond
the scope of this article. From the algorithmic perspective, federated learning [120]
emerges as a promising solution to address the fundamental problems of privacy and
locality of data in the conventional centralized setting. Instead of bringing data to
the (centralized) code, federated learning brings the code to (decentralized) data and
exploits the distributed resources to train a model collaboratively. Thus, it gets rid of
the need for the data to be transferred to a single server. Several open-source federated
learning systems are available, e.g. FATE [121], PaddleFL [122], TensorflowFL [123], and
Pysyft [124], that would facilitate future research in this direction. Developing compact
deep neural networks [125] for sleep staging also becomes relevant. This particularly
fits to longitudinal monitoring as model personalization and development can be done
on devices, like wearables, smartphones, or Internet-of-Things (IoT) edge devices and
the person’s data can stay local. Since these devices operate under run-time energy
and memory storage constraints, they can only accommodate compact models due to
their reduced energy consumption, memory requirement, and inference latency. First,
compact versions of existing state-of-the-art models can be derived via quantization
[126,127] to reduce bit-depth of the weights and pruning [128,129] to remove redundant
weights. Second, a network architecture can be hand-designed to remove redundancy,
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                 13

for example depth-wise convolution [130] and shift-based module [131], and thus improve
efficiency. Although this approach often results in good model compactness, there
is no guiding principle in hand-engineering a network architecture and most of the
existing works are more or less based on trial-and-error. An alternative approach
is to automatically search for network architectures, i.e., neural architecture search
(NAS) [132, 133], which has seen some success, for example in the image domain [134]

4.5. Disorders affecting sleep structure
If a subject suffers from severe neurological disorders, this can have a drastic impact on
their sleep. It may both change the structure, timing and outward characteristics of the
individual’s sleep [135], and it can also change the physiological features of the various
sleep stages [136]. This can eventually lead to different types of issues, which require
different types of solutions. First, if the manual scoring of the recordings becomes
harder, training and validation of a sleep-staging model becomes equally hard [6, 84].
We are not aware of any methodological studies on how to deal with this issue in sleep
scoring, but it is a general issue for most types of medical data. Certainly, some of
the methods employed in, for instance, medical imaging analysis [137] could be re-
purposed for sequence-to-sequence sleep-staging models. Second, if the underlying issue
is that distinct sleep stages are becoming less defined (which could be the case in very
advanced brain damage), it is possible that more flexible approaches such as continuous
sleep depth estimation [138, 139] are a better fit. Third, even if the above issues do not
appear, the changes in transition probabilities or even feature spaces have to be absorbed
by a classification algorithm to achieve good sleep-staging performance. Fortunately,
some studies have shown that a model’s performance can be improved significantly if
it is individualized, for instance when the subjects are suffering from epilepsy [106] or
RBD [48].
      A particular implementation which is interesting in this context is the “ASEEGA”
algorithm [140] which extracts frequency-based features and scales them according to
the individual night. This results in an algorithm which achieves an average Cohen’s
kappa of 0.8 for healthy adults and full PSG setups (thus, not quite state-of-the-art),
but which, on the other hand, appears to be quite resistant to perturbations caused by
sleep disorders [141] (reaching Cohen’s kappa values between 0.75 and 0.80, depending
on disorders). Another promising approach, similar to the “ASEEGA” algorithm, is
to feed an entire night into the algorithm at once. In theory, this could enable the
algorithm to detect subject- or disease-specific perturbations, and adjust for them. We
have seen the approach applied by Li et al. [142] for arousal detection, to great success.

4.6. Black-box criticism and interpretability
4.6.1. Black-box criticism and adoption Trust, a psychological mechanism to deal with
uncertainty, is a crucial factor influencing interactions and relationships between human
and AI, particularly between clinicians and AI in the healthcare domain. This is the
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                  14

chief mechanism that shapes the use and adoption of AI in healthcare settings where
life is involved [143]. With its capabilities, deep learning has demonstrated its benefits
to healthcare in many aspects: superior performance, capability of handling large and
complex data, data-driven learning ability, etc. Examples are the application of deep
learning to image-based diagnosis [144], clinical outcome prediction [145], automatic
electrocardiogram (ECG) analysis [146], automatic sleep analysis [6], mental health
screening [147], intelligent assistive technologies for dementia care [148], to mention
a few. However, the complex nature of these algorithms and their inherent “black-
box”-ness have been deterring medical professionals’ trust [145, 149]. The way that
a deep neural network processes input data through interconnected layers to arrive
at its staging decisions poses difficulties in deciphering how it learns to produce the
outputs. Expectedly, automatic sleep staging systems are not an exception as black-box
skepticism remains one of the main questions around their clinical value and adoption.

4.6.2. Interpretability Interpretability is critical for a trustworthy sleep-staging system
due to the fact that sleep stages are often ambiguous and even different human experts
tend to disagree to a certain extent [22, 150]. While addressing this interpretability
problem is mandatory to unleash the clinical value of deep-learning-based sleep staging
algorithms, it requires novel technical approaches to understanding the behaviour of
these AI systems (i.e., explainable AI [151])
     A few attempts have been made to introduce interpretability to a deep-learning-
based automatic sleep staging system. Most of them explain the models using feature
visualization methods, such as sensitivity maps [152,153] by Vilamala et al. [42], Guided
Gradient-weighted Class Activation Maps (Guided Grad-CAM) [154] by Andreotti et
al. [51], saliency map [155] by Jia et al. [63], and self-attention score [156] by Phan
et al. [24]. In another work, Lee et al. [157] proposed to associate a model’s learning
process with expert-defined EEG patterns. These patterns were used as templates
for the first convolutional kernels of a CNN and were located in a test EEG signal
via cosine similarity maximization to achieve interpretability. Al-Hussaini et al. [158]
gained interpretability from the perspective of decision rules by coupling a deep learning
model with a regression tree. Prototypes in the high-dimensional embedding space of
a CNN were firstly derived and used to generate similarity for each PSG epoch with
the expert-defined rules. The similarity scores were then classified by a decision tree.
Several resulting splitting rules of the decision tree were found similar to the guidelines
for human annotators [10].
     Ultimately, future research towards interpretable automatic sleep staging could
benefit from explainable deep learning research in general. On the one hand, new
backpropagation-based methods (e.g., layer-wise relevance propagation [159, 160], Deep
Learning Important FeaTures (DeepLIFT) [161], and integrated gradients [162]) and
perturbation-based methods (e.g., occlusion sensitivity [163], representation erasure
[164], meaningful perturbation [165], and prediction difference analysis [166]) can be
explored to improve models’ explanation via scientific visualization of characteristics
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                  15

of an input that influence the output of a model. Designing intrinsically explainable
deep networks, like [24, 63], that can jointly optimize model performance and provide
explanations as part of the model output is another potential direction. These intrinsic
methods are probably more desirable than the post-hoc methods that seek explanation
of models that were never designed to be explainable in the first place. On the other
hand, there are model distillation approaches [167,168] in which the knowledge encoded
within a deep learning model (i.e., the “black-box” model) is distilled into a “white-
box” model which is meant to identify the decision rules influencing the outputs of
the deep learning model, as shown in [158]. The distilled models, potentially simple
and interpretable, such as decision tree or logistic regression, offer the explanation
power while still achieving reasonable performance. In this way, one could alleviate
the compromise between interpretability and prediction accuracy to some extent.
     However, it remains an open question how the explainability of a model could be
objectively quantified, evaluated, and compared. Our opinion is that an explainable
AI system for automatic sleep scoring should be inspired by the way a sleep expert
performs manual scoring to provide interpretability to (1) whether the features and the
rules resulted from an algorithm are clinically relevant to and underpin sleep and (2) how
the decision on a target epoch is made under the influence of its neighboring epochs given
their strong dependency due to the continuous nature of sleep. However, answering these
questions in automatic sleep staging is tricky. First, most of the existing approaches
explain the models via the prism of expert-defined rules and features, however, many of
these features are not well-defined while the majority of the rules for human annotators
are vague [10]. Second, these features and rules cannot be used in many scenarios, for
instance, wearable EEG [27,103,169] since the underlying signals are different from scalp
EEGs and not readily interpretable for a human scorer. Third, in practice, many features
and rules learned by these networks do not conform to the established features and rules.
However, these challenges point in the direction of moving beyond interpretability. We
envision that efforts should also be spent on understanding the disharmonizing features
and rules resulted purely from data. Clinical explanations for them would potentially
help us to gain further insights about underlying neurophysiology of human sleep, which,
in turn, could be used to update the manual-scoring features and rules [158, 170].

4.7. Data mismatch due to distributional shifts between datasets/cohorts
Sleep data typically come from different sources with a wide range of institutions,
demographics, diseases, modalities, devices, and acquisition conditions. As a result,
these mismatches violate the data assumption of being independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) required for a machine learning system. Even when a deep-learning
sleep staging model is trained on large amounts of data, resulting in powerful hierarchical
representations, the discrepancies are still computationally significant, degrading the
accuracy of sleep staging models on unseen data with a shift (i.e., mismatch) in their
distribution [59]. A naive solution for this problem is to form training data from
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                 16

as many conditions as possible [21], ideally from all types of conditions that will be
foreseeably encountered in the deployment phase. However, this is expensive, time-
consuming, and infeasible. In addition, novel setups will likely emerge in the study
of particular sleep disorders [5, 6] or when exploring the feasibility of new monitoring
devices [26, 28, 103, 110, 171].
     As the data mismatches cannot be simply reversed by signal preprocessing,
approaches to migrate a pretrained model to a target cohort with an unseen condition
(e.g., via transductive transfer learning or domain adaptation [59, 110, 111, 172–174])
have been adopted. While most existing works on this direction utilized a large
labelled database for model pretraining in a supervised fashion, semi-supervised [175]
and unsupervised (i.e. self-supervised) [176–180] training regimes would further allow
leveraging unprecedentedly large amounts of unlabelled data for this purpose. However,
before migrating a pretrained model to a target domain, distributional shifts need to
be detected and quantified to indicate the variation of the model and whether the
migration is necessary or not. Entropy of the probability outputs could potentially
serve this purpose [181]. Then, methods for model migration from a source domain
to a target domain can be categorized depending on the availability of labelled data
in the target domain. In the best case when all data is labelled, supervised domain
adaptation methods [182], such as [59, 110, 111], appear to be most sensible. In these
methods, a pretrained model needs to undergo a fine tuning process, i.e., the model is
further trained in a supervised fashion using the target domain’s labelled data. When
only a part of the target domain data are labelled, supervised domain adaptation is,
in essence, still feasible if the amount of labelled data is sufficient. Otherwise, fine
tuning using a small amount of data will be exposed to a great risk of overfitting. In
any case, a better solution is to exploit semi-supervised domain adaptation methods,
that incorporate semi-supervised learning (SSL) [175] and domain adaptation [182],
to leverage both labelled and unlabelled data at the same time. For example, a
pretrained model can be fine tuned to simultaneously minimize the sum of supervised
classification and unsupervised reconstruction cost functions [183]. In the worst case
when all the data are unlabelled, unsupervised domain adaptation will be a natural
choice [184]. For example, encouraging results have been reported using adversarial
domain adaption methods to match the feature distributions of the source and target
domains via gradient reversal from a domain classifier that is tasked to discriminate
between the two domains [173, 174, 185]. A pretrained network can be also be adapted
to a target domain by modulating the domain-specific statistics of deep features stored
in the network’s normalization layers like batch normalization [186]. While the reliance
on target data labels are costly as human scoring is required, in general, the performance
gains are proportional to the amount of labelled data. With the same target-domain
data, the gains from supervised transfer learning methods are expected to be higher
than semi-supervised ones which are in turn higher than unsupervised ones. However,
success of model migration is also subject to training strategies, network-architecture
choices and datasets [59].
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                  17

     An alternative approach to the domain adaptation is data mapping. This has
remained mostly unexplored for sleep data. The difference is that domain adaptation
requires modification of the model parameters while data mapping aims to modify the
data to map them from one domain to another. To this end, a mapping function can
be learned to map from a certain target domain to the source domain. Evaluating
a sleep staging model on a target domain, the test data is firstly fed to the domain
mapping function to make them look like the source data before sleep staging takes
place. Inspired by the success of generative adversarial networks (GAN) [187] in image-
to-image translation, subject-to-subject or sequence-to-sequence PSG mapping could
potentially be done similarly with these GAN variants. However, the challenge here is
that we may wish to achieve the mapping by modifying the traits of the mismatched
factors in data while preserving the sequential nature of the sleep data.
     Another approach to align source and target domains is to force a sleep staging
model to learn domain-invariant feature representations [110, 188]. In other words, the
features learned by the model follow the same distribution no matter whether the input
are from the source or target domain, and so representing the underlying sleep stages
while being agnostic to other factors. As a consequence, the model trained on the source
domain can generalize well to the target domain without the necessity of modification
of the model parameters or data mapping. One way to achieve this is to minimize
the distances (e.g., Wasserstein distance [189, 190]) between the distributions during
training in addition to the classification task. An alternative to distance minimization
is to incorporate reconstruction losses [191, 192] to encourage the learned features to
reconstruct well either the target domain data or both the source and target domain
data. Another possibility is to rely on an adversarial domain classifier which is tasked
to discriminate the source and target domain. In light of adversarial training as in
a GAN [187], the idea is then to train the sleep staging model to learn the features
such that the domain classifier is unable to distinguish from which domain the features
originated [188]. However, this approach requires data from both domains to be available
at the training phase.

4.8. Heterogeneity: a challenge beyond data mismatch
Apart from the data-mismatch challenge discussed in Section 4.7, heterogeneity is
another challenge emerging from the data originated from different sources, or even
from different subjects of the same cohort. Typically the number of channels and
modalities in PSG recordings varies significantly due to the differences in channel
layout and recording setup. This is not a major challenge in many existing network
architectures relying on a single channel of one or a few modalities (i.e., EEG, EOG,
and EMG) [18, 19, 23, 62]. However, it limits the applicability of those utilizing a larger
number of channels [47, 66] when one or more employed channels are missing in test
data. In practice, different channels and modalities manifest different perspectives of the
underlying neurophysiological processes in human sleep. For example, Alpha rhythm
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                  18

appears most clearly in occipital lobe, sawtooth waves characterizing REM are best
captured in central lobe and K-complex events, the hallmark of N2, are best observed
in central lobe [10]. As a result, consolidating information from all available channels of
PSG data in a holistic view would potentially improve sleep-staging performance. This
will also facilitate model building from an unprecedented amount of data gathered from
different sources [6, 22, 62].
      Fortunately, tackling this challenge probably does not need to design entirely new
modelling paradigms but could build upon the current ones. One could devise an
intermediate layer that interfaces the heterogeneous raw data and a network. This layer
aims to amalgamate all available channels and modalities to form an input with a fixed
number of channels which are ready to be fed to any existing network architecture.
As a result, existing state-of-the-art models would be invigorated owing to the more
informative input. Guillot and Thorey [22] proposed such a layer using a multi-head
attention layer with N heads to map an input with varying number of channels to N
channels. Potentially, this could also be done using an across-channel pooling operator,
e.g., average pooling or max pooling. Channel mapping, for example via a convolutional
1 × 1 kernel [193], could also map the varying inputs into any fixed number of channels
and further enrich the resulting channels via non-linear activations. Ideally, such an
interface layer should be integrated to an existing sleep staging model and trained
jointly on the classification task in an end-to-end fashion. However, automatic channel
quality control should be put in place to exclude bad-quality channels with, for example,
highly noisy [6] and excessive data missing [102].

4.9. Subjectivity in model building
It is well-known that manual scoring of PSG is highly subjective. Many previous studies
consistently reported the consensus among human scorers around a Cohen’s kappa of
0.76 [150,194]. The consensus is particularly poor on epochs manifesting characteristics
of more than one sleep stages. Examples are N1 stage, epochs close to the boundary of
two stages, and data from patients with fragmented sleep. So far, it has been a common
practice to use the subjective and noisy labels annotated by a single scorer for model
training as if they are perfect. Thus, the scorer’s subjectivity is unavoidably transferred
into the trained model. Reducing such subjectivity is necessary but remains largely
uncharted.
      The above-mentioned subjectivity can be alleviated by scoring at a fine-grained
temporal resolution (i.e., smaller epochs [6, 21] or even samples [61, 62]). However, the
fine-grained supervision signals in these works were still derived from 30-second epoch
annotation, and therefore, the subjectivity continued to exist. A more proper treatment
would be to consider the labels as noisy by nature (in practice, one-hot ground-truth
labels are unknown or even not in existence) and robust training methods should be
devised to manage the noisy label [195, 196]. It also remains an open question how to
train a model with multiple supervision signals (i.e., annotations of two or more human
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                   19

scorers) at the same time rather than a single supervision signal as usual. Doing this
will encourage the model to adapt to the scoring style of a cohort of scorers. Note that,
this is different from averaging labels of multiple scorers [64] which eventually results in
a single supervision signal.

4.10. Scorer personalization
Since it is very likely that a model trained with the annotation from a single scorer
as described in Section 4.9 will mimic (i.e., overfit) the scorer’s style, the resulting
“subjective” model poses another challenge from the end-user perspective that is worth
being discussed separately here. Imagine a clinical scenario when a clinician is an end-
user of the scoring system. The trained model can be reasonably viewed as a digital
twin of the original scorer who labelled the data; hence, it will face disagreement on
staging decisions with a new human scorer (i.e., an end-user in this case) as similar as
disagreement between two human scorers. For maximum adoption by the clinician, this
raises the need for the model to gradually adjust to the scoring style of the new scorer.
Readers should note that this scorer personalization problem is orthogonal to the data
personalization discussed previously in Section 4.1.1.
     Tackling this challenge requires a closed-loop interaction between the model and
the end-user [197]. On the one hand, the disagreed staging decisions need to be first
identified. This could be done via uncertainty quantification, for example using entropy-
based metrics [24, 181] or an ensemble with Monte Carlo dropout [198], as the model’s
decisions with low confidence are more likely to be disagreed ones. Although this
approach can isolate a large portion of wrong decisions, a pitfall here is that an algorithm
may output contentious decisions with a very high confidence. This anomalous behavior
has been studied in many prior works [199]. While understanding this behavior in the
context of human sleep is an interesting subject on its own, methods will also need
to be developed to identify wrong decisions associated with high confidence. Model’s
interpretability (see Section 4.6.2) with the aid of convenient user-interface and user-
experience design will be equally important to allow the end-user to scrutinize the
potentially wrong decisions and make necessary corrections in an interactive manner.
On the other hand, given the end-user’s feedback, learning methods will be needed
to incrementally adapt the model using the newly labelled data in an open-ended
fashion. Approaches for continual learning [200], such as the meta-learning method used
in [201], stands out as promising candidates. While these methods are required to learn
from sequential, and potentially small, data, they also need to overcome catastrophic
forgetting [202], the central issue in this learning setting.

5. Conclusions

Benefits of automatic tools for sleep scoring have driven research in automatic sleep
staging for many decades. Promising results recently achieved by deep learning based
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                              20

methods have given incentives for a large number of research studies, now resulting
in solutions that have comparable performance to sleep experts on the sleep scoring
task, at least on healthy individuals. This methodological development has benefited
immensely from the initiatives for free access to large collections of de-identified sleep
data and open-source tools and techniques of many experiments available for researchers
around the world. We perceive this achievement as a small yet important milestone in
the use of AI in sleep research. However, many challenges still have to be overcome for
these AI tools to prove their clinical usefulness. Next to the challenge of sleep disorders,
issues related to data heterogeneity, model’s explainability and subjectivity will require
more attention. In order to bring sleep monitoring outside sleep labs to daily living
environments, prospective studies also have to be conducted to improve robustness to
low signal quality of mobile EEG devices and limited amounts of training data and to
address issues related to privacy and longitudinal monitoring. Once these challenges
have been overcome, we expect AI-based sleep scoring tools will play an important role
in day-to-day sleep practice, complementing the increasing need for trained sleep experts
and benefiting millions in need of accurate sleep assessment, monitoring, and treatment
options for many sleep disorders.

Author contributions

H. Phan and K. Mikkelsen contributed equally.

Acknowledgement

H. Phan is supported by a Turing Fellowship under the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1.

References

  [1] J. M. Siegel, “Clues to the functions of mammalian sleep,” Nature, vol. 437, no. 27, pp.
         1264–1271, 2005.
  [2] P. Maquet, “The role of sleep in learning and memory,” Science, vol. 294, no. 5544, pp. 1048–
         1052, 2001.
  [3] Ignacio Perez-Pozuelo, Bing Zhai, Joao Palotti, Raghvendra Mall, Michaël Aupetit, Juan M.
         Garcia-Gomez, Shahrad Taheri, Yu Guan, and Luis Fernandez-Luque, “The future of sleep
         health: a data-driven revolution in sleep science and medicine,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 3,
         no. 1, pp. 1–15, Mar. 2020, Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
  [4] R. G. Norman, M. A Scott, I. Ayappa, J. A. Walsleben, and D. M. Rapoport, “Sleep continuity
         measured by survival curve analysis,” Sleep, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1625–1631, 2006.
  [5] N. Cooray, F. Andreotti, C. Lo, M. Symmonds, M. T. M. Hu, and M. De Vos, “Detection of rem
         sleep behaviour disorder by automated polysomnography analysis,” Clinical Neurophysiology,
         vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 505–514, 2019.
  [6] J. B. Stephansen et al., “Neural network analysis of sleep stages enables efficient diagnosis of
         narcolepsy,” Nature Communications, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 5229, 2018.
  [7] J. A. E. Christensen, O. Carrillo, E. B. Leary, P. E. Peppard, T. Young, H. B. D. Sorensen,
         P. Jennum, and E. Mignot, “Sleep-stage transitions during polysomnographic recordings as
         diagnostic features of type 1 narcolepsy,” Sleep Medicine, vol. 16, pp. 1558–1566, 2015.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                              21

 [8] C. V. Senaratna, Jennifer L Perret, Caroline J Lodge, Adrian J Lowe, Brittany E Campbell,
        Melanie C Matheson, Garun S Hamilton, and Shyamali C Dharmage, “Prevalence of
        obstructive sleep apnea in the general population: A systematic review,” Sleep Med Rev,
        vol. 34, pp. 70–81, 2017.
 [9] S. Redline, P. V. Tishler, M. Schluchter, J. Aylor, K. Clark, and G. Graham, “Risk factors
        for sleep-disordered breathing in children. associations with obesity, race, and respiratory
        problems,” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, vol. 159, pp. 1527–
        1532, 1999.
[10] Richard B. Berry, Rita Brooks, Charlene Gamaldo, Susan M. Harding, Robin M. Lloyd,
        C. L. Marcus, and Bradley V. Vaughn, The AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and
        Associated Events: Rules, Terminology and Technical Specifications, American Academy of
        Sleep Medicine, 2.3 edition, 2016.
[11] A. C. Krieger, Ed., Social and Economic Dimensions of Sleep Disorders, An Issue of Sleep
        Medicine Clinics, Elsevier, 2017.
[12] V. K. Chattu et al., “The global problem of insufficient sleep and its serious public health
        implications,” Healthcare (Basel), vol. 7, no. 1, 2019.
[13] Institute of Medicine, Sleep Disorders and Sleep Deprivation: An Unmet Public Health Problem,
        Washington DC: The National Academies Press, 2006.
[14] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. N. Amaral, L. Glass, J. M. Hausdorff, P. Ch. Ivanov, R. G. Mark,
        J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C.-K. Peng, and H. E. Stanley, “Physiobank, physiotoolkit,
        and physionet: Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,”
        Circulation, vol. 101, pp. e215–e220, 2000.
[15] G. Q. Zhang, L. Cui, R. Mueller, S. Tao, M. Kim, M. Rueschman, S. Mariani, D. Mobley, and
        S. Redline, “The national sleep research resource: towards a sleep data commons,” J Am Med
        Inform Assoc., vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 1351–1358, 2018.
[16] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[17] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep learning, MIT Press, 2016.
[18] A. Supratak, H. Dong, C. Wu, and Y. Guo, “DeepSleepNet: A model for automatic sleep stage
        scoring based on raw single-channel EEG,” IEEE Trans. on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
        Engineering, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 1998–2008, 2017.
[19] H. Phan, F. Andreotti, N. Cooray, O. Y. Chén, and M. De Vos, “SeqSleepNet: end-to-end
        hierarchical recurrent neural network for sequence-to-sequence automatic sleep staging,” IEEE
        Trans. on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering (TNSRE), vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 400–410,
        2019.
[20] S. Biswal et al., “Expert-level sleep scoring with deep neural networks,” J Am Med Inform
        Assoc., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1643–1650, 2018.
[21] A. N. Olesen et al., “Automatic sleep stage classification with deep residual networks in a mixed-
        cohort setting,” Sleep, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. zsaa161, 2021.
[22] Antoine Guillot and Valentin Thorey, “RobustSleepNet: Transfer learning for automated sleep
        staging at scale,” arXiv:2101.02452 [cs, eess, stat], Jan. 2021, arXiv: 2101.02452.
[23] H. Phan et al., “XSleepNet: Multi-view sequential model for automatic sleep staging,” IEEE
        Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), 2021.
[24] H. Phan et al., “SleepTransformer: Automatic sleep staging with interpretability and uncertainty
        quantification,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Engineering (TBME), 2022.
[25] Tomi Miettinen, Katja Myllymaa, Susanna Westeren-Punnonen, Jari Ahlberg, Taina Hukkanen,
        Juha Toyras, Reijo Lappalainen, Esa Mervaala, Kirsi Sipila, Sami Myllymaa, Tomi Miettinen,
        Katja Myllymaa, Susanna Westeren-Punnonen, Jari Ahlberg, Taina Hukkanen, Juha Toyras,
        Reijo Lappalainen, Esa Mervaala, Kirsi Sipila, and Sami Myllymaa, “Success Rate and
        Technical Quality of Home Polysomnography With Self-Applicable Electrode Set in Subjects
        With Possible Sleep Bruxism,” IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics, vol. 22, no.
        4, pp. 1124–1132, July 2018.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                              22

[26] Pierrick J. Arnal, Valentin Thorey, Michael E. Ballard, Albert Bou Hernandez, Antoine Guillot,
       Hugo Jourde, Mason Harris, Mathias Guillard, Pascal Van Beers, Mounir Chennaoui, and
       Fabien Sauvet, “The Dreem Headband as an Alternative to Polysomnography for EEG Signal
       Acquisition and Sleep Staging,” bioRxiv, p. 662734, June 2019.
[27] Kaare B. Mikkelsen, Yousef R. Tabar, Simon L. Kappel, Christian B. Christensen, Hans O. Toft,
       Martin C. Hemmsen, Mike L. Rank, Marit Otto, and Preben Kidmose, “Accurate whole-night
       sleep monitoring with dry-contact ear-EEG,” Scientific Reports, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 16824, Nov.
       2019, Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[28] Kaare B. Mikkelsen, James K. Ebajemito, Maria A. Bonmati-Carrion, Nayantara Santhi,
       Victoria L. Revell, Giuseppe Atzori, Ciro della Monica, Stefan Debener, Derk-Jan Dijk, Annette
       Sterr, and Maarten de Vos, “Machine-learning-derived sleep–wake staging from around-the-ear
       electroencephalogram outperforms manual scoring and actigraphy,” Journal of Sleep Research,
       vol. 0, no. 0, pp. e12786, Nov. 2018.
[29] L. Fiorillo et al., “Automated sleep scoring: A review of the latest approaches,” Sleep Medicine
       Reviews, vol. 48, pp. 101204, 2019.
[30] O. Faust et al., “A review of automated sleep stage scoring based on physiological signals for the
       new millennia,” Comput Methods Programs Biomed, vol. 176, pp. 81–91, 2019.
[31] Y. Roy et al., “Deep learning-based electroencephalography analysis: a systematic review,” J
       Neural Eng, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 051001, 2019.
[32] M. Radha, P. Fonseca, A. Moreau, M. Ross, A. Cerny, P. Anderer, X. Long, and R. M.
       Aarts, “A deep transfer learning approach for wearable sleep stage classification with
       photoplethysmography,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 4, no. 135, 2021.
[33] B. Zhai, I. Perez-Pozuelo, E. A. D. Clifton, J. Palotti, and Y. Guan, “Making sense of
       sleep: Multimodal sleep stage classification in a large, diverse population using movement and
       cardiac sensing,” Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
       Technologies, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1–33, 2020.
[34] E. Dafna, A. Tarasiuk, and Y. Zigel, “Sleep staging using nocturnal sound analysis,” Scientific
       Reports, vol. 8, no. 13474, 2018.
[35] X. Long, R. Otte, E. van der Sanden, J. Werth, and T. Tan, “Video-based actigraphy for
       monitoring wake and sleep in healthy infants: A laboratory study,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 5,
       pp. 1075, 2019.
[36] S. Toften, S. Pallesen, M. Hrozanovad, F. Moen, and J. Gronli, “Validation of sleep stage
       classification using non-contact radar technology and machine learning (somnofy),” Sleep
       Medicine, pp. 54–61, 2020.
[37] M. Piriyajitakonkij, P. Warin, P. Lakhan, P. Leelaarporn, N. Kumchaiseemak, S. Suwajanakorn,
       T. Pianpanit, N. Niparnan, S. C. Mukhopadhyay, and T. Wilaiprasitporn, “SleepPoseNet:
       Multi-view learning for sleep postural transition recognition using uwb,” IEEE Journal of
       Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1305–1314, 2021.
[38] Yi-Qi Lin and Sheng-Di Chen, “RBD: A red flag for cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s
       disease?,” Sleep Medicine, vol. 44, pp. 38–44, Apr. 2018.
[39] H. Dong et al., “Mixed neural network approach for temporal sleep stage classification,” IEEE
       Trans. on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 324–333, 2018.
[40] R. Wei, X. Zhang, J. Wang, and X. Dang, “The research of sleep staging based on single-lead
       electrocardiogram and deep neural network,” Biomed Eng Lett., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 87–93, 2018.
[41] O. Tsinalis, P. M. Matthews, Y. Guo, and S. Zafeiriou, “Automatic sleep stage scoring with
       single-channel EEG using convolutional neural networks,” arXiv:1610.01683, 2016.
[42] Albert Vilamala, Kristoffer H. Madsen, and Lars K. Hansen, “Deep convolutional neural networks
       for interpretable analysis of EEG sleep stage scoring,” in Proc. MLSP, 2017.
[43] H. Phan, F. Andreotti, N. Cooray, O. Y. Chén, and M. De Vos, “DNN filter bank improves 1-max
       pooling CNN for single-channel EEG automatic sleep stage classification,” in Proc. EMBC,
       2018, pp. 453–456.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                               23

[44] A. Malafeev et. al., “Automatic human sleep stage scoring using deep neural networks,” Front
        Neurosci., vol. 12, no. 781, 2018.
[45] S. Biswal et al., “SLEEPNET: Automated sleep staging system via deep learning,” arXiv
        preprint arXiv:1707.08262, 2017.
[46] H. Sun et al., “Large-scale automated sleep staging,” SLEEP, vol. 40, no. 10, pp. zsx139, 2017.
[47] S. Chambon, M. N. Galtier, P. J. Arnal, G. Wainrib, and A. Gramfort, “A deep learning
        architecture for temporal sleep stage classification using multivariate and multimodal time
        series,” IEEE Trans. on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 26, no. 4, pp.
        758–769, 2018.
[48] F. Andreotti, H. Phan, N. Cooray, C. Lo, M. T. M. Hu, and M. De Vos, “Multichannel sleep
        stage classification and transfer learning using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. EMBC,
        2018, pp. 171–174.
[49] H. Phan, F. Andreotti, N. Cooray, O. Y. Chén, and M. De Vos, “Joint classification and prediction
        CNN framework for automatic sleep stage classification,” IEEE Trans. Biomedical Engineering
        (TBME), vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1285–1296, 2019.
[50] A. Sors et al., “A convolutional neural network for sleep stage scoring from raw single-channel
        eeg,” Biomed Signal Process Control, vol. 42, pp. 107–114, 2018.
[51] F. Andreotti, H. Phan, and M. De Vos, “Visualising convolutional neural network decisions in
        automatic sleep scoring,” in Proc. Joint Workshop on Artificial Intelligence in Health (AIH),
        2018, pp. 70–81.
[52] H. Phan, F. Andreotti, N. Cooray, O. Y. Chén, and M. De Vos, “Automatic sleep stage
        classification using single-channel EEG: learning sequential features with attention-based
        recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. EMBC, 2018, pp. 1452–1455.
[53] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Computing, vol. 9, no.
        8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[54] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, C. Gulcehre, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio, “Learning
        phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation,” in
        Proc. EMNLP, 2014, pp. 1724–1734.
[55] E. Hartmann, “The 90-minute sleep-dream cycle,” Archives of General Psychiatry, vol. 18, no.
        3, pp. 280–286, 1968.
[56] I. Feinberg and T. C. Floyd, “Systematic trends across the night in human sleep cycles,”
        Psychophysiology, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 283–291, 1979.
[57] C. Sun et al., “A hierarchical neural network for sleep stage classification based on comprehensive
        feature learning and multi-flow sequence learning,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
        Informatics, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1351–1366, 2020.
[58] H. Ghimatgar et al., “Neonatal eeg sleep stage classification based on deep learning and hmm,”
        Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 036031, 2020.
[59] H. Phan, O. Y. Chén, P. Koch, Z. Lu, I. McLoughlin, A. Mertins, and M. De Vos, “Towards
        more accurate automatic sleep staging via deep transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical
        Engineering, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 1787–1798, 2021.
[60] H. Seo et al., “Intra- and inter-epoch temporal context network (iitnet) using sub-epoch features
        for automatic sleep scoring on raw single-channel EEG,” Biomed Signal Process Control, vol.
        61, pp. 102037, 2020.
[61] M. Perslev et al., “U-time: A fully convolutional network for time series segmentation applied
        to sleep staging,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019, pp. 4417–4428.
[62] M. Perslev et al., “U-Sleep: resilient high-frequency sleep staging,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 4,
        no. 72, 2021.
[63] Z. Jia, Y. Lin, J. Wang, X. Wang, P. Xie, and Y. Zhang, “SalientSleepNet: Multimodal salient
        wave detection network for sleep staging,” IJCAI, 2021.
[64] A. Guillot, F. Sauvet, E. H. During, and V. Thorey, “Dreem open datasets: Multi-scored sleep
        datasets to compare human and automated sleep staging,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                                24

       Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1955–1965, 2020.
[65] W. Neng, J. Lu, and L. Xu, “Ccrrsleepnet: A hybrid relational inductive biases network for
       automatic sleep stage classification on raw single-channel eeg,” Brain Sciences, vol. 11, no.
       456, 2021.
[66] Z. Jia et al., “GraphSleepNet: Adaptive spatial-temporal graph convolutional networks for sleep
       stage classification,” in Proc. International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI),
       2020, pp. 1324–1330.
[67] E. Eldele et al., “An attention-based deep learning approach for sleep stage classification with
       single-channel eeg,” IEEE Trans. on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 29,
       pp. 809–818, 2021.
[68] J. Cohen, “A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales,” Educ Psychol Meas., vol. 20, pp.
       37–46, 1960.
[69] B. Kemp, A. H. Zwinderman, B. Tuk, H. A. C. Kamphuisen, and J. J. L. Oberye, “Analysis of
       a sleep-dependent neuronal feedback loop: the slow-wave microcontinuity of the EEG,” IEEE
       Trans. on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 1185–1194, 2000.
[70] C. O’Reilly, N. Gosselin, J. Carrier, and T. Nielsen, “Montreal archive of sleep studies: An
       open-access resource for instrument benchmarking & exploratory research,” Journal of Sleep
       Research, pp. 628–635, 2014.
[71] M. M. Ghassemi et al., “You snooze, you win: the physionet/computing in cardiology challenge
       2018,” in Proc. 2018 Computing in Cardiology Conference (CinC), 2018, vol. 45, pp. 1–4.
[72] S. F. Quan et al., “The sleep heart health study: design, rationale, and methods,” Sleep, vol.
       20, no. 12, pp. 1077–1085, 1997.
[73] S. Khalighi, T. Sousa, J. M. dos Santos, and U. Nunes, “Isruc-sleep: a comprehensive public
       dataset for sleep researchers,” Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 124, pp. 180–192, 2016.
[74] M. G. Terzano, L. Parrino, A. Smerieri, R. Chervin, S. Chokroverty, C. Guilleminault,
       M. Hirshkowitz, M. Mahowald, H. Moldofsky, A. Rosa, R. Thomas, and A. Walters, “Atlas,
       rules, and recording techniques for the scoring of cyclic alternating pattern (cap) in human
       sleep,” Sleep Medicine, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 187–199, 2002.
[75] X. Chen et al., “Racial/ethnic differences in sleep disturbances: the multi-ethnic study of
       atherosclerosis (MESA),” Sleep, vol. 38, pp. 877–888, 2015.
[76] T. Blackwell et al., “Associations between sleep architecture and sleep-disordered breathing and
       cognition in older community-dwelling men: The osteoporotic fractures in men sleep study,”
       J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., vol. 59, pp. 2217–2225, 2011.
[77] Y. Song et al., “Relationships between sleep stages and changes in cognitive function in older
       men: the MrOS sleep study,” Sleep, vol. 38, pp. 411–421, 2015.
[78] C. L. Marcus et al., “Childhood adenotonsillectomy trial (chat). a randomized trial of
       adenotonsillectomy for childhood sleep apnea,” N Engl J Med., vol. 368, no. 25, pp. 2366–2376,
       2013.
[79] S. Redline et al., “The childhood adenotonsillectomy trial (chat): rationale, design, and
       challenges of a randomized controlled trial evaluating a standard surgical procedure in a
       pediatric population,” Sleep, vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 1509–1517, 2011.
[80] S. Mousavi, F. Afghah, and R. Acharya, “SleepEEGNet: Automated sleep stage scoring with
       sequence to sequence deep learning approach,” PLoS One, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. e0216456, 2019.
[81] K. Chen et al.,       “Sleep staging from single-channel EEG with multi-scale feature and
       contextual information,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics
       and Biomedicine (BIBM), 2019, vol. 23, pp. 1159–1167.
[82] A. Supratak and Y. Guo, “TinySleepNet: An efficient deep learning model for sleep stage scoring
       based on raw single-channel EEG,” in Proc. 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE
       Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2020.
[83] M. A. Jaoude et al., “Expert-level automated sleep staging of long-term scalp electroencephalog-
       raphy recordings using deep learning,” Sleep, vol. 43, no. 11, pp. zsaa112, 2020.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                                25

 [84] H. Korkalainen et al., “Accurate deep learning-based sleep staging in a clinical population with
         suspected obstructive sleep apnea,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol.
         24, no. 7, pp. 2073–2081, 2020.
 [85] W. Qu et al., “A residual based attention model for eeg based sleep staging,” IEEE Journal of
         Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 2833–2843, 2020.
 [86] W. Chen, Y. Yang, and P. Yang, “Hnsleepnet: A novel hybrid neural network for home health-
         care automatic sleep staging with raw single-channel eeg,” in 2020 IEEE 18th International
         Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 2020, pp. 555–560.
 [87] Y. Li et al., “An automatic sleep staging model combining feature learning and sequence
         learning,” in Proc. 12th International Conference on Advanced Computational Intelligence
         (ICACI), 2020, pp. 419–425.
 [88] H. Nie, S. Tu, and L. Xu, “Recsleepnet: An automatic sleep staging model based on feature
         reconstruction,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
         (BIBM), 2021, pp. 1458–1461.
 [89] W. G. Coon and N. M. Punjabi, “Automatic sleep staging using a small-footprint sensor array and
         recurrent-convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. 10th International IEEE/EMBS Conference
         on Neural Engineering (NER), 2021, pp. 1144–1147.
 [90] H. Phan, A. Mertins, and M. Baumert, “Pediatric automatic sleep staging: A comparative study
         of state-of-the-art deep learning methods,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10211, 2022.
 [91] S. A. Imtiaz, “A systematic review of sensing technologies for wearable sleep staging,” Sensors,
         vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1562, 2021.
 [92] Guoliang Kang, Lu Jiang, Yi Yang, and Alexander G. Hauptmann, “Contrastive Adaptation
         Network for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
         Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Long Beach, CA, USA, June 2019, pp. 4888–4897,
         IEEE.
 [93] Yu Sun, Eric Tzeng, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros, “Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
         through Self-Supervision,” arXiv:1909.11825 [cs, stat], Sept. 2019, arXiv: 1909.11825.
 [94] M. Padmanabhan, L.R. Bahl, D. Nahamoo, and M.A. Picheny, “Speaker clustering and
         transformation for speaker adaptation in speech recognition systems,” IEEE Transactions
         on Speech and Audio Processing, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 71–77, Jan. 1998.
 [95] Robert M. French, “Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks,” Trends in Cognitive
         Sciences, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 128–135, Apr. 1999.
 [96] J. Buckelmüller, H-P P. Landolt, H. H. Stassen, and P. Achermann, “Trait-like individual
         differences in the human sleep electroencephalogram.,” Neuroscience, vol. 138, no. 1, pp.
         351–356, 2006.
 [97] L. A. Finelli, P. Achermann, and A. A. Borbély, “Individual ’fingerprints’ in human sleep EEG
         topography.,” Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 25, no. 5 Suppl, Nov. 2001.
 [98] Martin Hemmsen, Kaare Mikkelsen, Mike Rank, and Preben Kidmose, “Long-term monitoring
         of trait-like characteristics of the sleep electroencephalogram using ear-EEG,” Sleep, vol. 44,
         no. Supplement 2, pp. A109–A109, May 2021.
 [99] Adrienne M. Tucker, David F. Dinges, and Hans P. A. Van Dongen, “Trait interindividual
         differences in the sleep physiology of healthy young adults,” Journal of Sleep Research, vol.
         16, no. 2, pp. 170–180, June 2007.
[100] Huy Phan, Kaare Mikkelsen, Oliver Y. Chén, Philipp Koch, Alfred Mertins, Preben Kidmose,
         and Maarten De Vos, “Personalized automatic sleep staging with single-night data: a pilot
         study with Kullback–Leibler divergence regularization,” Physiological Measurement, vol. 41,
         no. 6, pp. 064004, July 2020, Publisher: IOP Publishing.
[101] E. C.-P. Chua, S.-C. Yeo, I. T.-G. Lee, L.-C. Tan, P. Lau, S. S. Tan, I. H. Mien, and J. J. Gooley,
         “Individual differences in physiologic measures are stable across repeated exposures to total
         sleep deprivation,” Physiological Reports, vol. 2, no. 9, pp. e12129, Sept. 2014.
[102] K. B. Mikkelsen, H. Phan, M. L. Rank, M. C. Hemmsen, M. de Vos, and P. Kidmose,
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                             26

         “Sleep monitoring using ear-centered setups: Investigating the influence from electrode
         configurations,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 2021.
[103] Kaare B. Mikkelsen, David Bové Villadsen, Marit Otto, and Preben Kidmose, “Automatic sleep
         staging using ear-EEG,” BioMedical Engineering OnLine, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 111, Sept. 2017.
[104] R. Palaniappan and D. P. Mandic, “Biometrics from brain electrical activity: A machine learning
         approach,” IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 738–
         742, 2007.
[105] Kaare B. Mikkelsen, Yousef R. Tabar, Christian B. Christensen, and Preben Kidmose, “EEGs
         Vary Less Between Lab and Home Locations Than They Do Between People,” Frontiers in
         Computational Neuroscience, vol. 15, 2021, Publisher: Frontiers.
[106] Sirin W. Gangstad, Kaare B. Mikkelsen, Preben Kidmose, Yousef R. Tabar, Sigge Weisdorf,
         Maja H. Lauritzen, Martin C. Hemmsen, Lars K. Hansen, Troels W. Kjaer, and Jonas Duun-
         Henriksen, “Automatic sleep stage classification based on subcutaneous EEG in patients with
         epilepsy,” BioMedical Engineering OnLine, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 106, Oct. 2019.
[107] B. Koley and D. Dey, “An ensemble system for automatic sleep stage classification using single
         channel EEG signal,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 1186–95, 2012.
[108] Alexander Neergaard Olesen, Poul Jennum, Emmanuel Mignot, and Helge B. D. Sorensen,
         “Deep transfer learning for improving single-EEG arousal detection,” in 2020 42nd Annual
         International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine Biology Society (EMBC), July
         2020, pp. 99–103, ISSN: 2694-0604.
[109] Panteleimon Chriskos, Christos A. Frantzidis, Christiane M. Nday, Polyxeni T. Gkivogkli,
         Panagiotis D. Bamidis, and Chrysoula Kourtidou-Papadeli, “A review on current trends in
         automatic sleep staging through bio-signal recordings and future challenges,” Sleep Medicine
         Reviews, vol. 55, pp. 101377, Feb. 2021.
[110] E. R. M. Heremans et al., “Feature matching as improved transfer learning technique for wearable
         EEG,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00644, 2021.
[111] H. Phan, O. Y. Chén, P. Koch, A. Mertins, and M. De Vos, “Deep transfer learning for single-
         channel automatic sleep staging with channel mismatch,” in Proc. 27th European Signal
         Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2019, pp. 1–5.
[112] J. Fan et al., “Eeg data augmentation: towards class imbalance problem in sleep staging tasks,”
         J. Neural Eng., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 056017, 2020.
[113] O. Al Zoubi, C. K. Wong, R. T. Kuplicki, H.-W. Yeh, A. Mayeli, H. Refai, M. Paulus, and
         J. Bodurka, “Predicting age from brain eeg signals—a machine learning approach,” Front.
         Aging Neurosci., vol. 10, 2018.
[114] P. Wang and J. Hu, “A hybrid model for eeg-based gender recognition,” Cogn Neurodyn., vol.
         13, pp. 541–554, 2019.
[115] S. M. Alarcao and M. J. Fonseca, “Emotions recognition using eeg signals: A survey,” IEEE
         Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 10, pp. 374–393, 2019.
[116] S. Sangnark, P. Autthasan, P. Ponglertnapakorn, P. Chalekarn, T. Sudhawiyangkul,
         M. Trakulruangroj, S. Songsermsawad, R. Assabumrungrat, S. Amplod, K. Ounjai, and
         T. Wilaiprasitporn, “Revealing preference in popular music through familiarity and brain
         response,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 21, pp. 14931–14940, 2021.
[117] G. Zhao, Y. Ge, B. Shen, X. Wei, and H. Wang, “Emotion analysis for personality inference from
         eeg signals,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 362–371, 2018.
[118] “Official journal of the european union. general data protection regulation,” https: //eur-
         lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679, accessed 12/02/2021.
[119] B. M. Gaff, H. E. Sussman, and J. Geetter, “Privacy and big data,” Computer, vol. 47, no. 6,
         pp. 7–9, 2014.
[120] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, “Communication-efficient
         learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[121] “Webank. federated ai technology enabler (fate),” https://github.com/FederatedAI/FATE,
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                               27

         accessed 16/02/2021.
[122] “Baidu. federated deep learning in paddlepaddle,” https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleFL,
         accessed 16/02/2021.
[123] “Tensorflow federated: Machine learning on decentralized data,” https://www. tensor-
         flow.org/federated, accessed 16/02/2021.
[124] “Openmined. pysyft,” https://github.com/OpenMined/PySyft, accessed 22/02/2021.
[125] W. Xia, H. Yin, and N. K. Jha, “Efficient synthesis of compact deep neural networks,” arXiv
         preprint arXiv:2004.08704, 2020.
[126] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio, “Quantized neural networks:
         Training neural networks with low precision weights and activations,” Journal of Machine
         Learning Research, vol. 18, pp. 1–30, 2018.
[127] C. Zhu, S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, “Trained ternary quantization,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017.
[128] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, “Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks with
         pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding,” in Proc. ICLR, 2016.
[129] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras amd T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning convolutional neural
         networks for resource efficient transfer learning,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017.
[130] N. Ma, X. Zhang, H.-T. Zheng, and J. Sun, “Shufflenet v2: Practical guidelines for efficient cnn
         architecture design,” in Proc. ECCV, 2018.
[131] B. Wu, A. Wan, X. Yue, P. Jin, S. Zhao, N. Golmant, A. Gholaminejad, J. Gonzalez, and
         K. Keutzer, “Shift: A zero flop, zero parameter alternative to spatial convolutions,” in Proc.
         CVPR, 2018.
[132] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, “Designing neural network architectures using
         reinforcement learning,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017.
[133] B. Zoph and Q. V. Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning,” in Proc. ICLR,
         2017.
[134] M. Tan, B. Chen, R. Pang, V. Vasudevan, M. Sandler, A. Howard, and Q. V. Le, “MnasNet:
         Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile,” in Proc. CVPR, 2019.
[135] Alex Iranzo, “Sleep in Neurodegenerative Diseases,” Sleep Medicine Clinics, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.
         1–18, Mar. 2016.
[136] Joan Santamaria, Birgit Höogl, Claudia Trenkwalder, and Donald Bliwise, “Scoring Sleep in
         Neurological Patients: The Need for Specific Considerations,” Sleep, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 1283–
         1284, Oct. 2011.
[137] Nima Tajbakhsh, Laura Jeyaseelan, Qian Li, Jeffrey N. Chiang, Zhihao Wu, and Xiaowei
         Ding, “Embracing imperfect datasets: A review of deep learning solutions for medical image
         segmentation,” Medical Image Analysis, vol. 63, pp. 101693, July 2020.
[138] Musa H. Asyali, Richard B. Berry, Michael C. K. Khoo, and Ayse Altinok, “Determining a
         continuous marker for sleep depth,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 37, no. 11, pp.
         1600–1609, Nov. 2007.
[139] Simona Carrubba, Paul Young Kim, David E. McCarty, Andrew L. Chesson, Clifton Frilot, and
         Andrew A. Marino, “Continuous EEG-based dynamic markers for sleep depth and phasic
         events,” Journal of Neuroscience Methods, vol. 208, no. 1, pp. 1–9, June 2012.
[140] Christian Berthomier, Xavier Drouot, Maria Herman-Stoı̈ca, Pierre Berthomier, Jacques Prado,
         Djibril Bokar-Thire, Odile Benoit, Jérémie Mattout, and Marie-Pia d’Ortho, “Automatic
         Analysis of Single-Channel Sleep EEG: Validation in Healthy Individuals,” Sleep, vol. 30, pp.
         1587–1595, Nov. 2007.
[141] Laure Peter-Derex, Christian Berthomier, Jacques Taillard, Pierre Berthomier, Romain Bouet,
         Jérémie Mattout, Marie Brandewinder, and Hélène Bastuji, “Automatic analysis of single-
         channel sleep EEG in a large spectrum of sleep disorders,” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine,
         Mar. 2021, Publisher: American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
[142] Hongyang Li and Yuanfang Guan, “DeepSleep convolutional neural network allows accurate and
         fast detection of sleep arousal,” Communications Biology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2021.
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                                28

[143] O. Asan amd A. E. Bayrak and A. Choudhury, “Artificial intelligence and human trust in
         healthcare: Focus on clinicians,” J Med Internet Res., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. e15154, 2020.
[144] D. S. W. Ting, Y. Liu, P. Burlina, X. Xu, N. M. Bressler, and T. Y. Wong, “Ai for medical
         imaging goes deep,” Nat Med, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 539–40, 2018.
[145] A. Rajkomar et al., “Scalable and accurate deep learning with electronic health records,” npj
         Digital Medicine, vol. 1, pp. 18, 2018.
[146] A. H. Ribeiro, M. H. Ribeiro1, G. M. M. Paix ao, D. M. Oliveira, P. R. Gomes, J. A. Canazart,
         M. P. S. Ferreira, C. R. Andersson, P. W. Macfarlane, W. Meira Jr, T. B. Schön, and
         A. L. P. Ribeiro, “Intelligent assistive technology for alzheimer’s disease and other dementias:
         a systematic review,” Nat Com, vol. 11, pp. 1760, 2020.
[147] C. Su, Z. Xu, J. Pathak, and F. Wang, “Deep learning in mental health outcome research: a
         scoping review,” Translational Psychiatry, vol. 10, pp. 116, 2020.
[148] M. Ienca, F. Jotterand, B. Elger, M. Caon, A. S. Pappagallo, and R. W. Kressig et al., “Intelligent
         assistive technology for alzheimer’s disease and other dementias: a systematic review,” J
         Alzheimers Dis, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1301–40, 2017.
[149] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of
         interpretability is both important and slippery,” Queue, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 31–57, 2018.
[150] H. Danker-Hopfe et al., “Interrater reliability for sleep scoring according to the Rechtschaffen &
         Kales and the new AASM standard,” J. Sleep Res., vol. 18, pp. 74–84, 2009.
[151] D. Gunning and D. W. Aha, “DARPA’s explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) program,” AI
         Magazine, vol. 40, pp. 44–58, 2019.
[152] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, A. Nguyen, T. Fuchs, and H. Lipson, “Understanding neural networks
         through deep visualization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06579, 2015.
[153] P. M. Rasmussen, K. H. Madsen, T. E. Lund, and L. K. Hansen, “Visualization of nonlinear
         kernel models in neuroimaging by sensitivity maps,” NeuroImage, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1120–1131,
         2011.
[154] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual
         explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE International
         Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017, pp. 618–626.
[155] X. Qin, Z. Zhang, C. Huang, M. Dehghan, O. R. Zaiane, and M. Jagersand, “U2 -net: Going
         deeper with nested u-structure for salient object detection,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 106, pp.
         107404, 2020.
[156] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, p. 5998–6008.
[157] T. Lee, J. Hwang, and H. Lee, “Trier: Template-guided neural networks for robust and
         interpretable sleep stage identification from eeg recordings,” arXiv Preprint arXiv:2009.05407,
         2020.
[158] I. Al-Hussaini, C. Xiao, M. B. Westover, and J. Sun, “SLEEPER: interpretable sleep staging
         via prototypes from expert rules,” Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 106, pp.
         721–739, 2019.
[159] S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K.-R. Müller, and W. Samek, “On pixel-wise
         explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation,” PloS ONE,
         vol. 10, no. 7, pp. e0130140, 2015.
[160] G. Montavon, W. Samek, and K.-R. Müller, “Methods for interpreting and understanding deep
         neural networks,” Digital Signal Processing, vol. 73, 2018.
[161] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje, “Learning important features through propagating
         activation differences,” in Proc. ICML, 2017, p. 3145–3153.
[162] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan, “Axiomatic attribution for deep networks,” in Proc.
         ICML, 2017, p. 3319–3328.
[163] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” in Proc.
         ECCV, 2014, p. 818–833.
[164] J. Li, W. Monroe, and D. Jurafsky, “Understanding neural networks through representation
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                                  29

         erasure,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08220, 2016.
[165] R. C. Fong and A. Vedaldi, “Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful
         perturbation,” in Proc. ICCV, 2017, p. 3429–3437.
[166] L. M. Zintgraf, T. S. Cohen, T. Adel, and M. Welling, “Visualizing deep neural network decisions:
         Prediction difference analysis,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017.
[167] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?: Explaining the predictions
         of any classifier,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD, 2016, p. 1135–1144.
[168] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,”
         arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
[169] A. Sterr, J. K. Ebajemito, K. B. Mikkelsen, M. A. Bonmati-Carrion, N. Santhi, C. della Monica,
         L. Grainger, G. Atzori, V. Revell, S. Debener, D.-J. Dijk, and M. De Vos, “Sleep eeg derived
         from behind-the-ear electrodes (ceegrid) compared to standard polysomnography: A proof of
         concept study,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 12, no. 452, 2018.
[170] T. Penzel, X. Zhang, and I. Fietze, “Inter-scorer reliability between sleep centers can teach us
         what to improve in the scoring rules,” Clin. Sleep Med., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 89–91, 2013.
[171] S. Myllymaa et al., “Assessment of the suitability of using a forehead eeg electrode set and
         chin emg electrodes for sleep staging in polysomnography,” J. Sleep Res., vol. 25, no. 6, pp.
         636–645, 2016.
[172] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, X. Li, and C. Guan, “Adversarial
         domain adaptation with self-training for eeg-based sleep stage classification,” arXiv preprint
         arXiv:2107.04470, 2021.
[173] C. Yoo, H. W. Lee, and J. Kang, “Transferring structured knowledge in unsupervised domain
         adaptation of a sleep staging network,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics,
         2021.
[174] R. Zhao, Y. Xia, and Y. Zhang, “Unsupervised sleep staging system based on domain
         adaptation,” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, vol. 69, pp. 102937, 2021.
[175] J. E. van Engelen and H. H. Hoos, “A survey on semi-supervised learning,” Machine Learning,
         vol. 109, pp. 373–440, 2020.
[176] L. Jing and Y. Tian, “Self-supervised visual feature learning with deep neural networks: A
         survey,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 43, pp. 4037–
         4058, 2021.
[177] X. Jiang, J. Zhao, B. Du, and Z. Yuan, “Self-supervised contrastive learning for eeg-based sleep
         staging,” in 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2021.
[178] C. Yang, D. Xiao, M. B. Westover, and J. Sun, “Self-supervised electroencephalogram
         representation learning for automatic sleep staging,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15278, 2021.
[179] M. N. Mohsenvand, M. R. Izadi, and P. Maes, “Contrastive representation learning for
         electroencephalogram classification,” in Proc. of Machine Learning Research, 2020, vol. 136,
         pp. 238–253.
[180] H. Banville et al., “Uncovering the structure of clinical eeg signals with self-supervised learning,”
         Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 046020, 2021.
[181] K. B. Mikkelsen, Y. R. Tabar, , and P. Kidmose, “Predicting sleep classification performance
         without labels,” in Proc. EMBC, 2020, pp. 645–648.
[182] C. Tan, F. Sun, T. Kong, W. Zhang, C. Yang, and C. Liu, “A survey on deep transfer learning,”
         in Proc. Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning (ICANN), 2018.
[183] A. Rasmus, M. Berglund, M. Honkala, H. Valpola, and T. Raiko, “Semi-supervised learning with
         ladder networks,” in Proc. NIPS, 2018, pp. 268–283.
[184] G. Wilso and D. J. Cook, “A survey of unsupervised deep domain adaptation,” ACM
         Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 1–46, 2020.
[185] S. Nasiri and G. D. Clifford, “Attentive adversarial network for large-scale sleep staging,” in
         Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2020, vol. 126, pp. 1–21.
[186] J. Fan et al., “Unsupervised domain adaptation by statistics alignment for deep sleep staging
Automatic Sleep Staging of EEG Signals                                                             30

         networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 2022.
[187] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and
         Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. NIPS, 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[188] H. Zhao, R. T. Des Combes, K. Zhang, and G. Gordon, “On learning invariant representations
         for domain adaptation,” in Proc. ICML, 2019, pp. 7523–7532.
[189] S. Chambon, M. N. Galtier, and A. Gramfort, “Domain adaptation with optimal transport
         improves eeg sleep stage classifiers,” in Proc. 2018 International Workshop on Pattern
         Recognition in Neuroimaging (PRNI), 2018.
[190] M. Long, H. Zhu, J. Wang, and M. I. Jordan, “Unsupervised domain adaptation with residual
         transfer networks,” in Proc. NIPS, 2016, pp. 136–144.
[191] M. Ghifary, W. B. Kleijn, M. Zhang, D. Balduzzi, and W. Li, “Deep reconstruction classification
         networks for unsupervised domain adaptation,” in Proc. ECCV, 2016, pp. 597–613.
[192] K. Bousmalis, G. Trigeorgis, N. Silberman, D. Krishnan, and D. Erhan, “Domain separation
         networks,” in Proc. NIPS, 2016, pp. 343–351.
[193] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan:, “Network in network,” in Proc. ICLR, 2014.
[194] R. S. Rosenberg and S. Van Hout, “The american academy of sleep medicine inter-scorer
         reliability program: Respiratory events,” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, vol. 10, pp.
         447–454, 2014.
[195] N. Nigam, T. Dutta, and H. P. Gupta, “Impact of noisy labels in learning techniques: A survey,”
         in Proc. ICDIS, 2020, pp. 403–411.
[196] B. Han, Q. Yao, T. Liu, G. Niu, I. W. Tsang, J. T. Kwok, and M. Sugiyama, “A survey of label-
         noise representation learning: Past, present and future,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.04406,
         2020.
[197] S.-F. Liang, Y.-H. Shih, P.-Y. Chen, and C.-E. Kuo, “Development of a human-computer
         collaborative sleep scoring system for polysomnography recordings,” PLoS ONE, vol. 14, no.
         7, pp. e0218948, 2020.
[198] L. Fiorillo, P. Favaro, and F. D. Faraci, “Deepsleepnet-lite: A simplified automatic sleep stage
         scoring model with uncertainty estimates,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10600, 2021.
[199] A. Nguyen, J. Yosinski, and J. Clune, “Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confidence
         predictions for unrecognizable images,” in Proc. CVPR, 2015, pp. 427–436.
[200] G. I. Parisi, R. Kemker, J. L. Part, C. Kanan, and S. Wermter, “Continual lifelong learning with
         neural networks: A review,” Neural Networks, vol. 113, pp. 54–71, 2019.
[201] N. Banluesombatkul, P. Ouppaphan, P. Leelaarporn, P. Lakhan, B. Chaitusaney, N. Jaimchariy-
         atam, E. Chuangsuwanich, W. Chen, H. Phan, N. Dilokthanakul, and T. Wilaiprasitporn,
         “MetaSleepLearner: A pilot study on fast adaptation of bio-signals-based sleep stage classi-
         fier to new individual subject using meta-learning,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
         Informatics (JBHI), vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1949–1963, 2021.
[202] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins, A. A. Rusu, K. Milan,
         J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska, D. Hassabis, C. Clopath, D. Kumaran, and
         R. Hadsell, “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” PNAS, vol. 114, pp.
         3521–3526, 2017.
